Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s part
three of our three-part mini-series on
the loose theme of words and language.
In case you missed them, part
one was on words of the year,
and part two was on euphemisms.
Today, we’re talking about
something different altogether.
We’re going to be focusing on
the word “enshittification”.
It was coined in 2022 and was named Word
of the Year by various dictionaries for
its perfect capture of a cultural moment.
So in this episode, we’ll talk about
the word, what it means, why it matters,
and I’ll share a recent personal
experience that I think is a perfect
example of real-world enshittification.
OK then, let’s not waste a
minute and get right into it.
One of the best things, I think,
about learning different languages
is that it gives you an appreciation
for the sound of different words
to describe the same thing.
For example, in English, we say “child”
or “children” to describe a young person.
It’s a perfectly good word, and if
you only spoke English, you probably
wouldn’t think twice about it.
But I think several other languages
better capture the essence of being a
child, Bambino” in Italian is one example.
Or “niño” in Spanish. Even “barn” in
Swedish, if you ask me, does a better job.
It sounds more like “child”
than the English word “child”.
It is, of course, simply personal
preference; perhaps you think the
word “child” sounds more appropriate
than whatever it is in your language.
And when you learn another language, you
realise that there are some words that
don’t have a perfect translation, a word
or expression with a meaning you can
understand, but a translation that misses
some of the nuance, the implicit meaning.
But sometimes, putting language
learning aside for a minute, there
is a word that comes along that
perfectly encapsulates something
that had never previously been named.
One example of this is “enshittification”.
It was coined in 2022 by a Canadian
journalist called Cory Doctorow,
and it touched such a nerve that it
was made the word of the year by the
American Dialect Society in 2023, then
by Australia’s Macquarie Dictionary
the next year, and it went on to
be added to both Dictionary.com and
Merriam-Webster’s lists of English words.
Before I tell you what it means, let’s try
to break it down and see if we can guess.
So, it’s en - E N - shit - ification.
There are three component
parts: en, shit, and ification.
En, E-N, is a prefix that is often related
to process or action, of changing state.
Enrich means to become rich.
Entrap means to become trapped.
Enlarge means to become larger.
If there’s an “en” at the start of
the word, then an adjective or a
verb, there’s a good chance that
this word means to become that thing.
Then “ification” at the end of the
word, as a suffix, has a similar
function, but it means “the process
of making or becoming something”.
And importantly, it turns
the word into a noun.
So, simplification is the process of
making something simple, clarification
is the process of making something
clear, and notification is the process
of notifying someone about something.
Then the word in the middle is perhaps
not so high-brow, not so formal.
It’s “shit”, an informal
and rude word for bad.
Now, you will probably know that I
don’t tend to talk about swear words
on this show, but as we are talking
about “enshittiification”, I do need
to spend a little more time talking
about what “shit” really means.
On the scale of swear words in British
English, it’s far from the worst,
and although you shouldn’t say it in
any kind of formal or professional
context, it’s not deeply offensive.
As an adjective, it means “bad”,
but it also sometimes has this
connotation of being frustratingly
and unnecessarily low quality.
So, “enshittification”, if we were to use
our linguistic Sherlock Holmes detective
skills, might be defined as the process
of something becoming increasingly
shit and frustratingly low quality.
When it was coined back in 2022,
it was in reference to social media
and sites such as Facebook and
Twitter, as it was known back then.
And here was the theory, as
set out by Cory Doctorow:
First, a platform starts
out as pretty good.
It’s useful, it’s free, and it genuinely
works in the interest of its users.
People like it, they tell their
friends, and the platform grows.
Then, in order to attract businesses,
the platform shifts slightly.
It starts prioritising
things that make money.
Maybe showing a few ads here,
tweaking an algorithm there.
It’s not terrible, but the experience
is no longer quite as good as it was.
Finally, once the user base is
locked in and the businesses are
too, the platform shifts again.
This time, it turns hostile to both.
It bombards users with low-quality
content, pushes ads in every
possible corner, and quietly
removes useful features.
Businesses are forced to pay more
to get less, and the value starts
flowing to the shareholders.
The platform has become worse for
everyone, but it’s more profitable,
at least in the short term.
That, Doctorow argued,
is enshittification.
A slow, deliberate transformation from
something that people love… to something
that they can’t stand, but can’t escape.
The primary example he used,
and one which I imagine you will
be familiar with, is Facebook.
It started out as a site exclusively
for Harvard students, then you needed
to have a university email address,
and then it was open to anyone.
I remember those early days.
One of my friends from school started
university before I did, so in the
autumn of 2005, he was able to get
a Facebook account, and I wasn’t.
It seemed like magic; real profiles,
no adverts, just authentic,
unfiltered connections with
friends and people you really knew.
Then businesses were encouraged to
create Facebook pages, whether that
was your friendly neighbourhood
coffee shop or the BBC News.
Facebook was already where everyone was
spending their time, so by creating a
Facebook page and encouraging people
to “follow” you, this was a new and
free way to connect with your audience.
Perhaps this wasn’t so
great for individual users.
After all, people weren’t really opening
up Facebook to see a link to a news
story or a poster about a special deal on
coffee; they wanted to see their friends.
But it was kind of ok.
Then Facebook started encouraging
advertisers onto the platform.
We have all these people.
We know all of this stuff about them.
If you pay us a small amount of
money, you can advertise to them.
Again, this wasn’t terrible, but it wasn’t
exactly what people had signed up for.
Mark Zuckerberg had initially
said this wouldn’t happen.
And then the same thing happened to
the businesses that had spent time
and resources in building up their
Facebook pages; Facebook now turned
around and said, “well, if you want your
followers to see your posts, you need
to pay us to make sure that happens”.
Again, a bit annoying for these
businesses, but they had put a lot of
time and effort into their Facebook pages.
It seemed like an overreaction
to walk away now simply because
Facebook wanted some money.
Then it got more expensive for
businesses to advertise, Facebook
started cramming more and more adverts,
the same thing happened on Instagram,
and slowly but surely, the experience
has degraded so much from its early
iteration that it’s hardly recognisable.
Still, there hasn’t been a mass
exodus on either side, neither
by the users nor the businesses.
Yes, user growth is down, and
many users have left entirely.
But there are still over 3 billion
monthly active users, 37% of
the global adult population.
People have invested too much,
Doctorow argued; their photos,
friends, and connections are all
there, and although the experience has
significantly degraded, they don’t leave.
And the final element is to do
with corporate value capture; all
the value from the platform has
flowed to shareholders, turning
Meta–Facebook’s parent company–into
a trillion-dollar business.
It happened with Facebook and Instagram,
and has also happened with many other
social media sites, from Twitter through
to Pinterest, Reddit, and TikTok.
And this is enshittification; the
gradual process of social media networks
becoming worse and worse, or shitter
and shitter, all while extracting the
maximum possible value from their users.
And no sooner had Doctorow coined and
explained the term than it began to change
shape, and people started pointing out
enshittification in every aspect of life.
Now, this wasn’t just your classic
people saying “things were better back
in my day”, but real-life examples of
how we are often asked to pay more for
something that is lower in quality.
Whether that was video games forcing
people to spend money on all sorts
of in-game upsells, Disney Plus or
Netflix doubling their prices for
less content, or showing adverts even
when you pay for it, or just your
favourite chocolate bar getting smaller
and more expensive at the same time.
Even Duolingo has been accused
of enshittification by getting
rid of its forum, switching its
gamification system and stuffing
its free version with more ads.
And it’s something that’s not restricted
to the digital world, either; it’s
something you can see almost everywhere.
I was reminded of this
late last year in the UK.
I was visiting my parents
with my two young kids.
My mother suggested that we go to a
sort of farm centre, which she had heard
had a nice little shop, a playground,
some animals, and a place where kids
could pick pumpkins for Halloween.
It sounded great in
theory, so off we went.
It wasn’t a particularly nice
day weather-wise, but it was
the end of October in England.
A bit of wind and rain
comes with the territory.
We arrived, and everything
seemed perfectly acceptable.
We had an unremarkable coffee
and snack at the cafe to warm up,
then headed towards the animals.
To get towards the animals, you had
to walk through a little fairground,
a little bit like how airports often
force you to walk through the Duty
Free section to get to your gate.
Slightly annoying, but there we go.
We arrived at the animal bit.
There were a couple of sad-looking
donkeys, two pigs, and that was about it.
Obviously, my kids wanted to go to
the fairground, because we had been
forced to walk through it, and I
agreed they could do one thing of
their choosing: one ride, or activity.
They chose the merry-go-round, the
ride where there are all of the
horses and carriages that move around
on a disk, with music and stuff.
As we approached the merry-go-round, I
had seen groups of people go up to the
cashier's desk and walk away seemingly
in disgust, which didn’t bode well,
but I figured I’d promised my kids
they could go, so how bad could it be?
It was only about 11 o’clock in
the morning, but the man behind
the desk looked like he’d been
arguing with customers for hours.
The price was £3 per child, but
because one of my children was under
1 metre tall, I’d have to come on
with him and buy my own ticket.
£9 in total.
A little over €10.
Now, the ride itself was perfectly ok.
It was a bit sad and old, the music was
a bit squeaky, and the horses looked
like they needed a lick of paint.
Still, my kids liked it, which I
guess is the most important thing.
The thing was, by the looks of how
many people had walked up to the
merry-go-round and not gone on, or were
standing around watching, presumably
put off by the high price, it seemed
to me like they could have reduced
their prices significantly and had many
more kids on the ride, and actually
made more money overall, but instead
they extracted as much value as they
possibly could from each paying customer,
extremely begrudgingly I must add.
And if you think this was an
isolated incident, it wasn’t.
There was a marshmallow barbecue,
which was a nice enough idea, but
nobody was there, because they were
charging £5 for a stick of what looked
like around 5 small marshmallows.
There was a “throw a hoop around the
rubber duck” game, but nobody was there,
because it was £4 for a single throw.
There were, we found out later,
more animals than the pair of
donkeys, but these were kept in
another part, and it was another
£13 per person, I think, to go in.
And looking at the online reviews,
most people seemed to be pretty
disappointed with the experience.
We decided against it and asked
the lady selling tickets how to get
back to the car park, to which she
responded that she didn’t know because
the part she worked in was actually
operated by a different company, so
she didn’t have anything to do with it.
Now, you might think that
this is just a complaint about
paying for stuff; it isn’t.
I appreciate that running a
business like this must be tough.
You have to pay staff, rent, look after
the animals, and all this costs money.
And comparing costs to those of my
childhood isn’t helpful, because
everything has got significantly
more expensive since then.
But why I bring up this experience
in the context of enshittification
is that, for me, it encapsulates
offline enshittification.
This animal farm had put up
adverts all over the Oxford
area, bringing people to it.
Once they got there, they didn’t
want to just turn around and go
home, but they begrudgingly stayed,
paying the inflated prices for a
lower-than-expected quality of experience.
Every possible corner had been cut,
and every possible activity cost extra.
And the thing was that it
doesn’t have to be that way.
Just a few days before this, my family
and I had gone to a theme park in Sweden.
The entry price was relatively high, but
once you got in, it seemed like no expense
had been spared; there were real pumpkins
piled up high, lots of smiling staff,
free shows, all this stuff that made
you think that they were really trying
to put on a good experience for you.
And this isn’t just a
question of Sweden vs.
the UK; there is another really good
animal park we’d been to with my kids a
couple of years before, quite close to
this other one in England, which hadn’t
yet been subject to enshittification.
But it is an increasing trend,
especially in the UK, and once you
notice it, you see it everywhere.
So, there we go, enshittification, a word
I think perfectly captures the essence
of something we can see all around us.
And going back to what we talked about
at the start of the episode, I looked
into how the term “enshittificaiton”
is translated into different languages.
Most seem to keep the English
version, while others do a direct
translation from the English,
like “Merdification” in French.
This just goes to show that
sometimes there is an expression
that is just so perfectly accurate
it can never really be translated.
OK, then, that is it for today's episode
on enshittification, and with that comes
the end of this three-part mini-series
on the theme of words and language.
In case you missed them, in part
one, we talked about words of the
year, and in part two we talked
about euphemisms in English.
As always, I’d love to
know what you think.
Do you see examples of
enshittification in your country?
Have you had an experience of
enshittification in the UK?
And what can we do to fix it?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.